in today's video we're going to make a
close equivalent to an n95 mask with
very common household materials without
the need for sewing vacuum cleaner bags
cotton or wearing citrus fruit on your
face so for my regular viewers I've put
some of my other planned videos on hold
this video is a little bit more serious
but I thought it was good information
and wanted to get it out as quickly as
possible so let's be around than usual
maybe now after two weeks and countless
hours in the shed plus many failed tests
I've finally worked out a pretty good
recipe so anyone can make a clothes
equivalent to an n95 mask which at a
minimum could be created with just a
nine and a pair of scissors in about ten
minutes but with a few extra tools these
can also be batch made quite quickly
best of all is materials you probably
have in abundance in your home right now
obviously a proper tested n95 or p2
respirator is always a best choice but
if you can't get one this could be a
close match in filtration great fitment
yet can be made easily personally I
would definitely wear this rather than a
cotton mask with sewing holes in it and
edge legs even over a surgical mask but
it's probably not as good as an airtight
plastic bag on your head yeah co2 is
going to make the problems fade away
maybe like yourself I did a bit of
research early on as to what some good
filtration alternatives are to n95 and
p2 respirators it seems that vacuum bags
came up a lot I went to investigate this
option however it turns out in all three
of our vacuum cleaner devices that it's
not 1990 then there's a furnace filter
option which was a bargain at five
hundred dollars postage but in all
seriousness these alternatives could be
good ideas but there's still the
fundamental problem with these which is
supply even if they're accessible now
demand suddenly goes through the roof
and then they're just as hard to get as
an actual in ninety five mask I thought
a good approach to this would be rather
than improvising a mask with alternative
materials
maybe attempt to replicate one as close
as possible while making the process
accessible to everyone
so my next move was to have a good look
at an actual m95 mask luckily I have a
good variety of used ones
knocking around in the shed looking at
these and doing some research online
almost all masks are made from nonwoven
polypropylene which has great air and
water filtering properties it's not a
popular textile in the clothing industry
but the good news is it's extremely
popular in almost everything else it's
pretty easily identifiable by the matrix
of dots on it and can be found in
varying thicknesses in everything from
reusable shopping bags to cheap aprons
disposable painting overalls suit covers
and I even managed to find some
lightweight material in gauze in the
first-aid kit so I grabbed a bunch of
different samples first I was concerned
that dots themselves may be a passage
for air but in checking it out on my
son's ten dollar microscope surprisingly
I was able to get a really good idea of
the structure sorry these shots aren't
the best and just take it on my phone
but it turns out the dots are pressed
and sealed making them look translucent
I then dissected the layers of the masks
I had on hand and comparing the masks to
the nonwoven material it appears to have
the exact same fiber size even with
similar air gaps on some but the other
aspect that makes this material really
great for this purpose is that it can be
plastic welded so there are no stitch
holes so what we'll be doing is making a
flat fold style mask using multiple
layers of material to get a nice deep
diffusion with the few refinements I've
done to allow different elastic strap
options as well as some changes to the
shape so you don't look like a duck the
largest most economical source of
material I found in the house was my car
cover but if you're familiar with my
other videos you'll know that this is
soaked in cap so I picked up a new one
from the shop now the first thing is to
wash and disinfect our material as a
note though if you're making masks for
other people unlike what you might see
in this video the whole process will
have to be hygienic and obviously don't
make masks for others if you're sick. Now
you're going to want to print out the
template, I've put this on my website and
I've put a link in the description. I've
done a lot of experimenting with
different layers and combinations of
different densities of the nonwoven
polypropylene I had on hand I found it
was best to use three to four layers of
the car cover which is around 100 GSM
per layer and then one layer of a
surgical gown which is about
50 GSM I get that surgical gowns aren't
easily available but they are a similar
way to disposable painting overalls as a
loose guide based on my research car
covers are about 100 to 150 grams per
square metre shopping bags are 80 to 100
gsm disposable painting overalls and
surgical gowns are a bit lighter at
about 30 to 50 GSM I'm going for a
lighter layer to go against your face
which is more comfortable but not
totally necessary however it probably
does provide a better seal against your
face so if you're just making the one
mask you can use a template to trace it
onto each of the layers and then cut
them out with scissors I was trying to
work out a way to cut more masks at a
time to make it more time efficient and
if you remember the hot wire foam cutter
that I made to cut material for the
cooler during video I set this up to see
if it would work and it turns out it
doesn't absolutely amazing job at
cutting this stuff and it's fun
experimenting with how many layers I
could do it once I pretty much got to
the limit of how many I could stack in a
pile so if you're looking at cutting
lots of masks or even just want to have
fun with it
it's definitely worth making one I've
actually made another video on how to
build one like this it costs about $30
in parts plus an old car battery and
table and about 30 minutes to put
together additionally to make it easier
to cut more in the future I traced and
then cut out a wood template so I can
run the hot wire along its edge after
you've cut the basic mask shape use your
template to also mark the elastic holes
in the top layer now we are going to
weld together all of these filter
elements around the edge proper n95
masks are made using an ultrasonic
welder none of us have that obviously so
I managed to work out a technique with
an iron when done right this has been
official over sewing partly because you
don't need a sewing machine but also
because sewing introduces perforations
to the material which can leak air also
because when dealing with this many
filter elements it's important to seal
around the edges thoroughly so air
travels through every filter element and
doesn't take a shortcut through the
edges and the seams Plus doing it this
way seals it nice and flat against your
face without any little bits
cotton stitches messing stuff up having
said that though if you do have trouble
with this next part of the process you
can sew it and you'll still end up with
a better mask than if you're using woven
material like cotton I tried so many
techniques to get this to work I almost
gave up a few times I'm not gonna lie
it's not the easiest to learn but once
you nail it it works awesome before
doing it on a mask get pieces of scrap
material stacked in the same way as he
masks and do a bunch of test runs with
your iron just before you through that
though this can produce a fair few
plastic fumes which you probably don't
want to be breathing so do it in a
well-ventilated space I ended up
whipping up this quick fume extractor
arm out of a beer carton and old
computer fan and this silver tube that
I've had in storage for years that I've
bought for some reason I can't remember
why but it worked a treat and it turns
out I also accidentally made a
hovercraft I got a bit distracted
playing with this for a bit with the
kids yeah good times on the hover soccer
field anyway back to the task at hand to
begin with we're just gonna weld the
outer edge of the mask leaving the front
seam for now which is the V shape to do
this you want to get your iron to about
180 degrees on the back corner if you
can measure it your iron will probably
differ from mine but the two I tested
this setting was about maximum heat or
slightly under with the front of your
mask facing up use the back corner of
your iron holding it at about a
30-degree angle with the bottom of the
iron facing the outer edge of the mask
then with a fair bit of downward
pressure you can slowly advance forward
around the edge of the mask aiming about
five millimeters in from the edge make
sure you do a bunch of test runs until
you find the right combination of
temperature speed and downward pressure
it's tempting to hold the iron flat but
it simply doesn't work to bond through
all the layers if your iron leaves a
trail that's cut all the way through the
layers the irons too hot or you going
too slow if yours is like mine with your
bottom layer being a different color
this is actually helpful because you can
see it start to be revealed as you move
the iron around
when you done let the world cool down
for a bit before messing with it
otherwise it's gonna ruin the joint
don't touch it the best way to see if
you've been successful with your joint
is that you haven't contracted a virus
no the best way to see if you've been
successful or not is to hold it up
against a bright light and you should
see a translucent line around the entire
edge then looking on the other side of
your mask you should see a shiny
depression around the inside edge of the
mask you can use your thumb to push the
inner lining around to make sure it's
bonded all the way through if it hasn't
worked you know if it hasn't worked you
can run the iron over it again an
additional time however you only get a
couple of lives doing this because the
plastic starts to break down with heat
by the third or fourth time even if you
get it to join it will start to get more
brittle and is more likely to fail later
on now if you've got a really good bond
all the way through to your back layer
you can use a pair of scissors to trim
the jagged edge of the plastic don't
trim too close to your world line though
leave as much border as possible I've
had some pretty good luck trimming with
the hot wire as well it doesn't look as
good and it can produce some little
sharp bits that need to be trimmed off
but it is a bit of extra backup to stick
all the layers together we can move on
to doing the nose seal rubber this part
is really important to create a nice
airtight seal on your face looking at
existing n95 masks they appear to use a
very low density foam rubber which is
about two millimeters thick it looks
like they use either NBR foam or very
soft
evie a foam they're only NBR foam I had
on hand in a similar density was in the
engine bay of my car and this really
soft exercise mat you have to be careful
though because mats like this are often
higher density a VA foam also which
isn't soft enough to contour to your
skin properly what if you do use though
it has to be closed-cell so it doesn't
let any air leak through as a rough
guide it should feel as soft as your
skin when pressed overall though if you
find some foam that has an adhesive
backing and as two millimeters thick
you're winning I had to use the NBR foam
exercise mat which has the perfect feel
that has to be sliced into thin
strips which was a pain so depending on
what you have on hand
you need a strip that's 2 millimeters
thick by a hundred millimeters long and
about 15 millimeters wide you'll also
need some double-sided tape to match the
width then stick this onto the back of
your strip of foam as a little
improvement over the n95 mask I've also
cut little 45-degree beveled edges on
each end of the foam strip this allows
it to sit flatter on your face without
little air gaps okay you can now stick
this strip across the top inside of your
mask and press it down firmly with that
complete it's now time to do the front
seam this one is a bit tricky because
we're using so many filter layers so
this seam will have eight to ten layers
of material that you'll need to join
together at the time of recording this
I'm still a bit on the fence about the
best way to do it but I'll give you some
options okay the first thing I tried was
plastic welding it to allow it to be
done without the use of a sewing machine
to do this it's similar to doing the
outside edge world except this time as
soon as you've run the iron all the way
to the top you need to flip the mask
over and then do the same thing to the
other side my main concern with this
option is the join might be a bit
brittle from the additional heat and
fail later on or there could be some
little hidden pinholes in the world of
the same after you've done this if you
hold it up to the light you should
probably expect to see some transparency
still where the plastic is pressed thin
however you need to look out for the
brighter more obvious holes to make this
joint safer I'd say the best thing to do
would be to run a bead of hot glue up
the middle of the mask to make sure
there's no holes and to give it a bit of
extra strength your second option is
sewing trying this are really not
confident in the seams ability to stop
air sneaking in through the edge of the
layers if you do so you're probably
better off doing a double stitch if you
have time and play around with the
stitch tension to get it right then the
third option which is currently my
favorite because I feel like it's the
safest so far this is doing a double
stitch down the front and then using the
iron to melt the plastic along the front
edge to seal it up
I've also since found if you wear gloves
you can pinch along the front of the
scene while the plastic still hot to get
a nice good seal
we can now move on to the elastic straps
similar to the n95 masks we're going to
use braided six millimeter elastic if
you're having trouble finding an elastic
you can use wider braids and I found
that you can actually split it down the
middle and it doesn't fray later on for
this template for an adult size you're
going to need to cut two lengths of 28
centimeters of elastic to attach them
I'll show you the best way to do it
first which uses a soldering iron but if
you don't have one there are
alternatives I'll show you after this
method is the closest to how some n95
masks are done which is nice and strong
with your soldering iron you'll find
that most have a removable tip loosen
the grub screw on the side and it should
fall out or you may have to thread it
out then you'll want to find a bolt that
fits in the hole in the end it doesn't
matter what type as long as you can get
it to stay in there and that the head of
the bolt isn't wider than your elastic
before I've tightened it up I've also
put it in the vise and I filed a head of
the bolt flat now like your plastic
welding earlier this is just a case of
working at the right combination of heat
time and pressure so you'll want to
practice on some scrap first with your
soldering iron at temperature put the
end of your elastic in position and then
simply press down the head of the bolt
onto the elastic with mine the
temperature can be adjusted and I found
that when it was set to 300 degrees it
was exactly 10 seconds for a good joint
but this will likely vary for you
depending on what soldering iron you
have and even things like the bolt
length can have an effect when you've
done it to know whether you've been
successful or not
look at the braid in the elastic which
is the areas between the rubber strands
and you should see it become translucent
showing the color of your mask
underneath plus when you flip your mask
over you should have a shiny depression
where you attached it after you attach
it don't move the elastic around until
it cools down otherwise you'll ruin the
join don't touch it this method is great
because it buttons through all the
layers for strength if it doesn't join
I've also found that you can have a
second and third attempt without ruining
it just don't let the tip of the
soldering iron touch your mask material
directly because this has a much lower
melting point and will create a hole
pretty quickly okay now for option
number two you can simply use hot glue
it works okay but it doesn't stick to
the elastic as well as the world holds
it plus it only bonds to the top layer
of your mask so it's probably not going
to last as long then the third option is
using a stapler to do this for strength
leave the elastic in from the opposite
direction to where it we pulled from
then put your staple through I'm not a
big fan because I think it could
introduce air leaks also like one of my
shop bought n95 masks it seems to fail a
lot and need to be reattached however
the benefits of stapling it it allows
you to use rubber bands if he can't
sauce braid it elastic there is one more
option as done on some n95 masks and
we've allowed for this in a template
this involves folding the edge of the
mask over and onto itself are then
tacking it in place with hot glue then
you can simply run the elastic through
the loops that you've created doing it
in this way can also allow the elastic
to be more easily adjusted or replaced
now we can do the last part of the
process which is the nose adjustment
wire wire or any kind of metal strip can
be difficult to integrate into a mask
without the use of a hem so hunting
around the shed trying to think of ways
to replicate existing n95 and those
adjustments the idea jumped out at me to
use flat electrical cable like you'd
find in the roof of your house and it
works a treat cables like this have
fairly solid wire coarse bending easily
and then holding their shape flat
electrical cable like this is a couple
of dollars per meter at hardware stores
then with some rough sandpaper give one
side of the cable a bit of a sand to
roughing it up this will make the glue
stick much better cut it into pieces
about nine centimetres long each give it
a good clean so it doesn't look dodgy
then if you want to be fancy you can pre
bend it into shape which can reveal
some of the rough strands of wire in the
end which he can then sand or file now
with the hot glue gun run a bead of glue
along the rough side of the cable then
stick it across the noise section of
your mask when you do it though try not
to put the middle of the wire too close
to the edge of the mask because this
could interfere with wearing safety
glasses if that is a factor make sure
you hold it in place while it cools down
once it's set
you can then pre bend it into a slight
bell shape with that attached just have
a quick look over the mask checking for
any flaws then depending on how it's
going to be used
you should disinfect it I also found it
handy to throw the masks in the dryer
with the heat turned completely off for
about 15 minutes
this helps aerate the masks of any
plastic he smells and also removes any
loose material that it may have picked
up while making it after this remove
them from the dry with gloves you can
then put them into individual snap lock
bags to keep them clean overall I'm
pretty happy with how these masks turned
out as far as the mask performance goes
yes I understand that you have to be
clean-shaven but we found that the
fitment and feel was exactly the same as
a flat fold with no leaks around the
edges it works perfectly for dust around
the shed otherwise as far as filtration
goes unfortunately don't have the
equipment to test it properly but we did
unscientifically try it out with a few
different aerosols equally both the flat
fold n95 and homemade mask noticeably
filtered out a good amount of the
products leaving just a gaseous smell
and then you wake up in your neighbor's
garden two days later spooning a beach
ball what was interesting though is it
actually outperformed the rigid n95 mask
that I had because it turns out the
fitment just wasn't as good this mask
doesn't have the nose wire and appears
to rely on additional foam which I guess
isn't the best choice but that brings me
to the most important point there's no
point wearing an n95 or Petrie mask
unless you fit it and handle it properly
make sure there's no air gaps around the
edges and always remember once you're
wearing it you have to treat the front
of your mask like your sole never touch
it especially in public if you do
accidentally touch it
wash your hands immediately with soap
and water without touching anything else
prior and don't let strangers stick
their nose in it I hope everyone is safe
and doing well
Chris and I are doing okay we're
currently self isolating and doing the
homeschooling thing with the kids like
many people though who basically
unemployed now with all our schedule
work for the year getting cancelled but
I guess the good news is we now have
more time to YouTube videos you know
we'll see what happens we'll see what
happens thank you for supporting this
channel by subscribing and sharing our
videos and for the supporters on patreon
I hope this video is helpful to people
maybe share it with your friends or
family maybe hit the subscribe button
I'd love to know if you have a good
actually making this yourself as well
send me any pictures or any tips that
you pick up or work out as you're making
it would love to note and I can share
that with my different sharing places
that I share things thanks again for
your support I'm Craig Turner YouTube
channel is turn 81 now catch you next
time hey leave that huh high visibility
where is he
he's right here you can tell because
it's fluorescent orange no losing me in
a hospital or I can serve as a roid cone